[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
chris mason and nina warhorse
our headlines today millions of people
move into stricter covert restrictions
as hundreds tried to leave london
before the rules kicked in christmas
plans are ruined as the relaxation of
rules is severely scaled back millions
in tier four
are told they can't mix with other
households at all
it is with a very heavy heart i must
tell you we cannot
continue with christmas as planned
and whilst all of us will see sunshine
at times today watch out for some dark
blooming clouds there could be some big
showers on their way details on that
and your full christmas week forecast
here on breakfast
[Music]
good morning to you it's just gone 8
o'clock sunday the
20th of december our top story millions
of people in england and wales are
waking up
to new lockdown restrictions at midnight
london and large parts of the southeast
of england were put into a new category
of tier
iv with an order to stay at home where
possible similar
restrictions came into force for all of
wales the announcements were made as
plans to relax restrictions over
christmas
were reduced our political correspondent
nick erdley reports
london last night his son made a
last-minute journey
before lockdown started but there won't
be the usual christmas getaway this year
significant restrictions are now in
place in large parts of england
and in the whole of wales they're coming
in scotland
and for millions christmas visits will
be considerably shortened
or cancelled altogether for leslie
nelson
who has terminal cancer that means she
won't be able to spend time with her
sister
literally i'd sat in my chair in floods
of tears
and messaging my family you know
what we're gonna do it just seems so
unfair
for somebody like me i'm terminally ill
i won't be here next christmas people
can think okay that's right
we'll celebrate christmas in the summer
i don't know if i'm going to be here in
the summer
my sister's going to be sitting at home
by herself 100 miles away
and her presence is under the tree
17 million people in england are back in
lockdown
in london the east and southeast of
england people are being urged to stay
at home
non-essential shops are closed plans to
allow christmas bubbles
have been cancelled in the rest of
england and in scotland
and in wales christmas is being cut back
significantly
instead of meeting for five days
christmas bubbles will only be allowed
for one
christmas day itself it is with a very
heavy heart i must tell you we cannot
continue with christmas as planned
in england those living in tier four
areas should not mix
with anyone outside their own household
at christmas
though support bubbles will remain in
place for those of particular risk of
loneliness
or isolation in wales lockdown was
brought forward and came in at midnight
nicola sturgeon has said nobody should
travel to scotland
from the rest of the uk and that she'll
bring in a lockdown in the mainland
from boxing day it makes me want to cry
as i'm sure
listening to it will make many of you
want to cry because i know how harsh
this sounds um i know how unfair it is
but this virus is unfair the changes
will come as a blow to many
the end of this tough year is going to
be no easier but politicians
and scientists believe the risk is just
too great
nick hurley bbc news westminster
let's go to our political correspondent
jessica parker jess many arguing this
morning it would not have come to this
had the government lock down london and
the south east sooner
yeah i mean there is certainly some
criticism facing boris johnson and the
government
this morning and of course it was only a
few days ago when
boris johnson was challenged as to
whether he did need to go further
he said he thought it would be inhuman
to cancel
christmas and here we are just a few
days later major curbs have been
announced a major curves of course
announced or brought forward in wales
and scotland as well the prime
minister's argument last night was that
as the virus
changes so does our defense against the
virus need to change
too but for all of the political leaders
the timing of this is incredibly
difficult we were just
days from those original christmas
bubbles beginning to kick in and of
course
many people will have made their plans
and of course many people as well
will now be worried about this new
variant of the virus what we're given to
understand of course is that
yes it's more infectious but there's not
evidence to suggest that it causes
a significant more disease for example
so i think people are digesting all that
news as well
in terms of the politics of this uh the
labour leader
sakir stama he suggested last night that
boris johnson had been indecisive labour
called for tougher measures
earlier in the week and i think as well
the prime minister will face
some resistance and criticism from his
own
back benches some conservative mps who
are saying that
they think this cycle of restrictions
and lockdowns hasn't worked in actually
are tackling the transmission of the
virus and there are even suggestions
that parliament should be recalled from
its christmas
uh break in order for mps to have a
chance to uh debate and vote
on these issues but look i really think
politics aside this morning the truth is
millions of people across the uk are
waking up
digesting the news that came overnight
and of course
adjusting again to a difficult new
reality absolutely just lots of
conversations with families this morning
thank you
let's bring andy moore into the
conversation andy's our correspondence
on oxford street
in central london morning to you andy
there's
obvious economic repercussions as well
aren't there because for so many people
and so many businesses
today in the coming days would have been
hugely
important in trying to recover lost
ground economically and
yet in tier four so many shops will be
shut
that's right i mean yesterday was
probably incredibly busy here well in
fact it was incredibly busy here today
it will be virtually uh deserted and as
you say the businesses that we're
looking forward to the
most lucrative few days of the year they
will be losing
uh billions of pounds in those areas uh
in tier four and in wales where they
have to shut down the organization that
represents a lot of these shops here
said it was catastrophic for business
they're calling for more government help
the cbi said it was a kick in the teeth
what's been the reaction of people here
in london well the chief medical officer
chris whittie last night was asked about
people who were
thinking of packing their bags and
heading out of town before the
restrictions came into force
his advice was to unpack those bags but
some people didn't hear that device or
didn't heed it
some very busy scenes at london train
stations last night
seats on trains were selling out within
a few hours uh
very difficult to social distance on
those crowded trains
so big changes here in the capital and
the mayor of london
uh sadiq khan was speaking to breakfast
a short time ago
a message to anybody watching this today
in london in the southeast is
you can't leave our area now because
it'd be breaking the rules
but even if you could please don't keep
it within london
follow the rules and make sure let's go
let's get on top of this
and what's been the reaction for people
what do they think of these
uh new restrictions well interesting an
opinion poll gave a snapshot of opinion
yesterday carried out after the press
conference
uh more than 70 of people said they
agreed that some parts of the country
should go into tier 4 regulations 78
of people the vast majority said they
would have to change their plans for
christmas
but only 11 said they intended to break
the regulations chris thanks andy
next the dutch government has banned
passenger flights between the uk and the
netherlands as of six o'clock this
morning because of the new variant of
the virus
it's also revealed that the same strain
of the infection was found in the
netherlands earlier this month
and is investigating the origins of that
case additional travel restrictions may
be put in place on trains and ferries
between the two countries
a uk government source has said there'll
be no post-brexit trade deal with the
european union
unless there is a substantial shift from
brussels in the coming days
it's understood there's likely to be a
decision before christmas
about whether or not to continue the
talks they remain stuck on
issues around fishing and subsidies it
is now less than
two weeks until the transition period
[Music]
ends
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news